Token airdrops without explicit associations (#655)
hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-655.md

---
hip: 655
title: Token airdrops without explicit associations
author: Nick Poorman <@nickpoorman>
working-group: Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Jasper Potts <@jasperpotts>, Atul Mahamuni <@atul-hedera>, Michael Tinker <@tinker-michaelj>, Leemon Baird <@lbaird>
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Review
created: 2022-10-20
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/654
updated: 2023-01-20, 2023-01-24, 2023-02-14
---

## Abstract

> [HIP-23](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-23) allowed an account owner to open up a specified number of automatic token-association slots into which others can transfer tokens. However, this capability doesn't allow for a pure "airdrop" of tokens. This HIP provides an additional mechanism for senders to airdrop tokens to other accounts, while allowing individual account holders to maintain control over what shows up in their account balances.

Reviewer: suggestion: to separate concept of balance with association. Depending on the implementation a group of associated tokens and those in the inbox could be grouped in a single list for UX.
Though uncertain it's fair to be specific that the user controls the association of their account
```suggestion
[HIP-23](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-23) allowed an account owner to open up a specified number of automatic token-association slots into which others can transfer tokens. However, this capability doesn't allow for a pure "airdrop" of tokens. This HIP provides an additional mechanism for senders to airdrop tokens to other accounts, while allowing individual account holders to maintain control over what token they are associated with.
```

## Rationale

Token airdrops are very common in the blockchain industry and many legitimate use cases require airdropping of tokens. This HIP attempts to provide a mechanism to enable these airdrops while still protecting the account owners, and imposing dis-incentivizing costs to the senders of the airdropped tokens.

## User Stories

### Terminology

The following terminology is used in the rest of this Specification

- Airdrop-Sender: the owner of a token that they wish to send to somebody without the explicit association/permission from the intended recipient
- Airdrop-Recipient: the intended recipient of the above airdrop
- Node-Operator: the operator of a node in the Hedera network
    
### User stories
    
- As an Airdrop-Sender, I want to send arbitrary tokens (Fungible and/or Non-fungible) to Airdrop-Recipients so that I can create interesting business use cases
    1. I understand that the recipients of the airdrop may not wish to accept these tokens and I am willing to pay for the network resources used while they make their decision.

>     2. If the intended Airdrop-Recipients do not accept my transfer, I want to be able to restore those tokens to my account so that I can do whatever I wish with those tokens.

Reviewer 2: This user story is not clear that I can or cannot retrieve (cancel, deleted) the airdropped tokens whenever I want, or only if they "Reject" the token.

By reading the rest of the document I am under the impression that the sender can indeed retrieve at any moment, and if the "Recipient" Explicitly rejects them, the tokens will automatically return to the "Sender" Balance.

But I think that should be more explicitly stated.

like:

```
- As an Airdrop-Sender, I want to retrieve the airdropped tokens from the recipient inbox while they are "Pending" at any moment.
- As an Airdrop-Sender, I want the tokens to return to my balance if the recipient rejects them.
```

>     2. If the intended Airdrop-Recipients do not accept my transfer, I want to be able to restore those tokens to my account so that I can do whatever I wish with those tokens.

Reviewer 3: 3. I want to be able to query the status of my airdrops, whether they are : Success , Pending (and the upcoming renewal fees/date), Expired or Rejected.
4. I want to set the number of renewal cycles that I'm willing to pay for, and have the airdrop expire if that limit is reached.

Reviewer 4: Scheduled transactions has that covered.

Reviewer 5: > 3\. I want to be able to query the status of my airdrops, whether they are : Success , Pending (and the upcoming renewal fees/date), Expired or Rejected.

Seems reasonable. I think this would be covered under the query to mirror node. Although it may take a few different requests to Mirror Node to gather all that data; probably would be fewer requests with something like a GraphQL API. With the `unsolicitedInbox` & `unsolicitedOutbox` queries, you should be able to deduce the Pending, Success, and Rejected status. Expired status would probably come from querying the existing Mirror Node APIs. In any case, it would be extremely simple to aggregate and cache a rolled up view of this data.

> I want to set the number of renewal cycles that I'm willing to pay for, and have the airdrop expire if that limit is reached.

I'd have to think about this one more.

> - As an Airdrop-Recipient, I want to receive arbitrary tokens (Fungible and/or Non-fungible) from the Airdrop-Senders so that I can accumulate those in my account.

Reviewer 3: 4. I want to reject an airdrop and remove it from my inbox without paying any fees to the network.

Reviewer 4: Ignoring a scheduled transaction will accomplish this.

Reviewer 4: The sender's wallet queries for association, if not found creates a scheduled transaction, the receiver's wallet queries a mirror node for inbound scheduled transactions, recognizes air-drops, prompts user for confirmation, makes the association, then signs the scheduled transaction which is set to execute on sufficient signatures.

OR

sender marks their NFT as an allowance, receiver creates and signs a TX moving the NFT to their own wallet

The UI experience can be streamlined for one-touch approval on the receiver's part.  If they don't want to be bothered, that is what auto-association is for.

I still don't see why this HIP is necessary, particularly given the amount of engineering required.

Reviewer 6: As a User, I do not want to be bothered with yet another Inbox that is full of spam, or any feature that encourages wallet developers to display a bright red badge showing the 1000's of random solicitations I have not yet acknowledged, accepted, or moved to junk.

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the further clarification on how you're suggesting this functionality without the HIP.

I can't understand how this would actually work in production. The linear pattern of calls makes sense but there's some assumptions and a lot of querying the network required by multiple parties to complete an airdrop.

Suggested flow without needing this HIP:
> 1. The sender's wallet queries for association, if not found creates a scheduled transaction
This makes sense to me, already how most execute airdrops.

> 2. The receiver's wallet queries a mirror node for inbound scheduled transactions, recognizes air-drops, prompts user for confirmation

This I don't get think is a scalable solution at all for developers. 

Feels like every wallet id has to continually check the mirror node to see if there's any transaction bytes trying to be sent to them. 

That's a lot of work if say Hashpack has to continually query for all wallets / or all transaction bytes to alert / show users that they've received an event. 

To me, this is why we need the HIP. You shouldn't have to query and build large scale solutions externally to the network to know when a very common event has happened (a user gets airdropped a token)

> 3. User makes the association, then signs the scheduled transaction which is set to execute on sufficient signatures.

This again requires a lot of work for wallet providers to not only continually monitor transaction bytes, realize it's an association, wait for user confirmation, then get the CORRECT transaction bytes that is the airdrop that correspond with that same token id. (1 account can send multiple transactions of multiple tokens, not sure how you'd be able to match bytes to token Id in that case honestly)

**The other method suggested:**
> Sender marks their NFT as an allowance, receiver creates and signs a TX moving the NFT to their own wallet

This requires a **user** to create a transaction to accept the token allowance  and then accept the NFT (as I understand how allowance works). 

**That's sort of the exact opposite from what we're looking for and why I believe this HIP is needed:**
No action needed from user to be able to accept an airdrop, while maintaining security to not accept all sent.

Added feature I very much agree with suggested by @rocketmay, allowing sender airdrop account to pay for association of that token to the account to allow empty wallets to receive earned FTs or NFTs.

Reviewer 7: > As a User, I do not want to be bothered with yet another Inbox that is full of spam, or any feature that encourages wallet developers to display a bright red badge showing the 1000's of random solicitations I have not yet acknowledged, accepted, or moved to junk.

I agree that this should be a state of the inbox. Reject all tokens sent to me that aren't associated. Replication of how this currently works makes a lot of sense to me. 

I added this use case here:
https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/pull/655/files#r1095099366

Reviewer 3: > query for inbound scheduled transactions,

I'm not aware of this capability. Can you post a link to documentation around this?

Reviewer 5: > 4. I want to reject an airdrop and remove it from my inbox without paying any fees to the network.

I believe a rejection would remove the record stored in your `unsolicited-tokens-inbox`. A one sided record, where the sender has a record in their `unsolicited-tokens-outbox`, and the receiver no longer has a record in their `unsolicited-tokens-inbox` would signify a rejection. I'm not entirely sure if that's how we would do it in practice. If that's the case the sender would need the ability to remove the record from their `unsolicited-tokens-outbox`. If that's not the case, I would need to think through more on how we could derive a rejected record other than stitching together historical data.

    1. I want to achieve the above while having explicit control over what tokens actually show up in my account.
    2. I want to achieve the above without being subject to the reputational/legal/spam risk of being associated with unwanted tokens

>     3. I want to achieve the above without having to be forced to pay for the storage/renewal of these unwanted tokens unless I explicitly accept those.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. I want to achieve the above without having to be forced to pay for the storage/renewal of these unwanted tokens unless I explicitly accept those.
    4. In addition to the above I want to atomically associate and transfer a token intended for airdrop that is in my inbox when I issue a transfer on it. I'm willing to pay the inbox acceptance fee (to capture the work the network needs to do), the association fee and transfer fee to achieve this preferred UX flow
```

>     3. I want to achieve the above without having to be forced to pay for the storage/renewal of these unwanted tokens unless I explicitly accept those.

Reviewer 7: > 4. I want to reject an airdrop and remove it from my inbox without paying any fees to the network.

5. I want to automatically approve all tokens sent to me with a treasury account id / account ids I define
6. I want to automatically reject all tokens sent to me that aren't associated

Reviewer 7: 7. I want to automatically reject all tokens sent to me with a treasury account id / account ids I define

Reviewer 5: I wonder, could we leave these as a future enhancement or if we need to flesh these out now? Seems like someone could also offer this as a service.

- As a node operator in the network, I want to make sure that the network security is not compromised and that somebody pays for the network resources that are used. The design of this HIP is partially inspired by how we handle spam emails in today's world, but with an added safeguard of ensuring that there is an economic disincentive for an Airdrop-Sender from sending indiscriminate spam. Through this HIP, we will create a new concept of unsolicited-token-outbox/inbox that maintain a record of intended transfers of airdrops.

>     

Reviewer 7: +1, very much agree this should be added to the scope of the HIP

> ## Specification

Reviewer: We should add product specification sections to show changes to proto, services, SDK, Mirror Node, mirror node explorer and relay. This HIP actually touches all of them :)

Author: Maybe we should split it up into several hips?

Reviewer: One HIP with a specification section for each product since it's a single feature

    
- Airdrop-Sender sends (i.e. airdrops) tokens to a list of Airdrop-Recipients using a regular `CryptoTransfer` call. For this discussion, let us assume that none of the intended Airdrop-Recipients have associated this token with their accounts.
- During token transfer validation, the network finds that the receivers have not associated this token with their accounts. Instead of rejecting this call with a failure code, the new behavior will store these tokens in the Airdrop-Sender's account in a new data structure called the `unsolicited-tokens-outbox`. Similarly, there is a concept of an `unsolicited-tokens-inbox` (or the incoming spam inbox) in the Airdrop-Recipients' accounts. And an entry is added in each of these recipient accounts registering the proposed transfers.

> - Network resources are used for storing these entries in both of these accounts (sender and receiver). The `CryptoTransfer` call will have an additional fee to cover the rent for these resources for one auto-renewal cycle. And the Airdrop-Sender will have to pay for the renewal of these resources in their normal auto-renewal process while these tokens remain in the unsolicited-outbox.

Reviewer: Is there a size limit to this list in terms of how many tokens can be in a potential state of acceptance for a user?

- The Airdrop-Recipient is responsible for renewal of the token association as part of their normal renewal after this point. Please note that the tokens are in the Airdrop-Sender's control until the Airdrop-Recipient calls the `AcceptUnsolicitedToken` API. As a result, they can also delete or burn these tokens while they are in the outbox. Doing so will remove the entries from the Unsolicited-inbox and Unsolicited-outbox automatically. Please note that these are conceptual names and the actual APIs/protobufs and REST APIs (mirror node) will be designed as this HIP develops further.

### New APIs/UIs:

- Services:
    - `AcceptUnsolicitedToken` API
- Mirror node:
    - GET `unsolicitedInbox` query for the Airdrop-Recipient to get content of their unsolicited-inbox.
    - GET `unsolicitedOutbox` query for the Airdrop-Sender to get content of their unsolicited-outbox.
- Wallets and Explorers
    - Wallets and Explorers should provide a way for users to be able to see the unsolicited-inbox and accept the tokens that they wish to accept

> ### Other considerations

Reviewer: Good questions.
I imagine if a token is in `unsolicited-token-inbox` then
1. `IERC20(airdroppedToken).balanceOf(AirdropRecipient)` => `0`
2. IERC20(airdroppedToken).balanceOf(AirdropSender) 
  - (either) => balance of sender including the token. Conceptually you could view it as until a recipient has accepted an airdrop the sender does does still own the tokens.
  - (or) => balance of sender including the token. Conceptually this would be like compartmentalizing it. Whiles in an outbox it doesn't count towards the main balance box. 

🤔

> ### Other considerations

Reviewer 2: I would say while the tokens airdropped are on "PENDING" status they don't count for either balances of:
IERC20(airdroppedToken).balanceOf(address). AirdropRecipient or AirdropSender.
why: 
for `AirdropRecipient` they are not associated with the token, if we assume they have a positive balance, some smart-contracts could use airdropped tokens to validate a condition, (feature or bug), and if after the "PENDING" is moved by the sender to "DELETED" feels  more like a "bug" to me and inconsistent.

Also, the balance should not be on the "sender" balance either since they have already being "airdropped" but siting on kind of a Escrow.

That is why I like the "Airdrops" to be implemented like "Optimism" and "Arbitrum", where they have to be claimed by the recipient, but also I understand the use cases for where actual airdrops might be needed.

- Auto-association: if the recipient of the token has *open* auto-association slots, then none of the mechanisms described in this document apply. That is treated as a regular transfer. The airdropped token will be auto-associated with the recipient and the transfer will succeed as it does today
- Already associated token type: if the airdropped token type is already associated with the recipient’s account, then none of the mechanisms described in this document apply. That is treated as a regular transfer. The airdropped token will simply be transferred to the recipient's account as it does today.

> - Receiver-signature-required: if the Airdrop-Recipient has receiver-signature-required set on their account, then the airdrop will only succeed if they also sign the `AcceptUnsolicitedToken` API with their receiver-signature.

Reviewer 5: Probably need more details here.

> - Custom fees on the token: The Airdrop-Sender will pay for the custom-fees levied on the token transfer at the time of the transfer (i.e. the time at which the Airdrop-Receiver signed the `AcceptUnsolicitedToken` transaction). Note that the custom-fees may change from the time the Airdrop-sender attempted to send the tokens to the time the actual transfer takes place, and it is a risk that the Airdrop-Sender will have to assume.

Reviewer 7: @mgarbs @Ashe-Oro @lbaird 
How would this work with fallback fees? 

The main issue we had with NFT sending before wallets was that fallback fees require signature from both the sending account and the receiving account. This is because the receiver is required to pay the fallback fee in HIP-18. 

This is how Hashpack's Secure Trade broke the log jam of trading NFTs on Hedera again, as it gave an ability to gather both signatures to transfer NFTs with fallback fees. 

If I were to try to send a NFT with a fallback fee, does the Inbox change who is the payer of the fallback fee in that transaction? Or does this restrict all FTs and NFTs that have a fallback fee defined to not use the inbox?

Apologies on the tags are the right people, not sure who exactly is best from Swirlds to ask

Reviewer 7: Three paths I think there are:

1. Allow users to accept transaction including fallback fees required from token that is in inbox 
2. Update HIP-18 to change account charged to be the sender account
3. Disallow tokens with fallback fees to use the inbox feature.

I like path 1 as it'll bring better UX to al use cases including trying to send a NFT with fallback fees for wallets on the network. 

Brings asynchronous signing that today is quite clunky with scheduled transactions on token transfer

Reviewer 5: > Note that the custom-fees may change from the time the Airdrop-sender attempted to send the tokens to the time the actual transfer takes place, and it is a risk that the Airdrop-Sender will have to assume.

We may be able to improve this situation by layering in https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/456

Reviewer: @HGraphPunks inline with the inbox concept the tokens have not yet been sent. So fallback fees won't be applicable till the recipient accepts the token. At accept time it would behave exactly like a normal transfer.
As part of acceptance a user could be expected to review the token being accepted and would then be aware of the fallback fee they would have to pay.
Of course wallets and DApps would be encouraged to showcases the details to help users not miss this information.

- Token deletion: if the token is deleted before the Airdrop-Receiver accepts the token, the `AcceptUnsolicitedToken` call will simply fail with an appropriate error message. This proposal is compatible with the concept of token associations as implemented on the network today. It builds on that concept but does not violate any of the existing concepts of token associations. Therefore, existing applications will not be adversely affected due to the implementation of this HIP.
- Information to the user: With this mechanism described in this document, the Airdrop-Sender will have to check their unsolicited-outbox to see which tokens have not been deposited to the Airdrop-Recipients’ accounts; and the airdrop-Recipient will have to check their unsolicited-inbox to see which tokens are pending their acceptance.
- Wallets, Exchanges, and mirror-node explorers will have to create visibility and notification mechanisms for the users.
        

> ## Backward Compatibility

Reviewer 8: If response code 22 `SUCCESS` is not returned from a smart contract precompile `cryptoTransfer`, some widely used smart contracts on the Hedera network will not work as intended. For example, in order to "airdrop" to yourself a new token by swapping an associated token for it on a DEX, response code 22 is required.

Reviewer: This is a really good point. 
A transfer needs to be able to convey back the interim period of outbox status to not give the wrong impression.
🤔

- Maintain the spam folder only on the Airdrop-recipient's side. In other words, allow anybody to send any tokens to a recipient's account, but the tokens go into a spam folder. And if they don't accept it for a given period of time, then delete or return the tokens to the sender. This approach was not accepted because this will put the burden of deleting the token as well as the temporary storage/renewal fees on the innocent recipient without providing any disincentives to the Airdrop-Sender. The proposed scheme makes the sender pay for these charges.
    
## Open Issues/FAQ

> Q1: Expected behavior when the user is not associated with tokens but the wallet has auto-associate slots available ? Does the receiver pay for association ? If the auto-associate slot is used for air-drop. does the spammer still pay for a return token ? Can the airdrop tokens received against associated slot be returned ? Can all token be returned ?

Reviewer 7: I believe that the auto-association should be first hit before the inbox would be hit. 

To me, auto-association is an action a use takes to say "I accept any token, and I've paid for x amount of them".
That should have to be full / 0 slots left first before tokens would be sent to the inbox. The user has paid to not have to accept / have any friction on just receiving a token

> Q1: Expected behavior when the user is not associated with tokens but the wallet has auto-associate slots available ? Does the receiver pay for association ? If the auto-associate slot is used for air-drop. does the spammer still pay for a return token ? Can the airdrop tokens received against associated slot be returned ? Can all token be returned ?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Q1: Expected behavior when the user is not associated with tokens but the wallet has auto-associate slots available? Does the receiver pay for association? If the auto-associate slot is used for airdrop, does the spammer still pay for a return token? Can the airdrop tokens received against the associated slot be returned? Can all tokens be returned?
```

> Q2: Would we then suggest that receiver never have auto-associate enabled.

Reviewer 7: I think there are use cases that may still want any token sent to the wallet. Even if accounts or treasury accounts can be whitelisted, some wallets still may want to auto accept tokens no matter where they come from.

auto-association call may just have to be tweaked in marketing /usage suggestions with the inbox. Positioned as auto accept x amount of tokens that are sent to the inbox. The payment for return token gas from the sender would return to sender automatically when a auto-association slot was used

Reviewer: Hmm, I think the concept of auto-association would sit besides and not inside that our the inbox in my mind. 
By setting auto association you are saying you are willing to associate with anything sent to you, in which case the network need not consider token inbox logic.
The inbox would come into play when no auto-association slots exist
